This program automates the forme insertion for XY, ORAS, and USUM that was initially developed by Axyn for XY.


I. Preparation:

0) If you have previously followed steps 1 to 4, you can just use "Load CFG & CSV" to load your previously saved config and CSV file. (If you are upgrading from a pre-CSV version, execute steps 3 and 4 after loading your CFG and you should be good).

1) Select game from menu.

2) Select the paths to your Model, Personal, Levelup, and Evolution GARCs. The file dialog will tell you which GARC you are looking for based on your selected game. The paths will be saved in your config file, so you can use those settings every time you work on this particular game.

3) Click "Create/Save CSV" to select a location to save your CSV file. This will record all the inserted formes, their indices in Personal, and what Model files correspond to which Forme. When you create the CSV, it will do so with the appropriate Forme names. Once you insert your formes, you can open the CSV and enter your custom forme names (it will give the new formes numerical designations). If you later use this tool to insert more formes, it will load your custom names. You can also change any stock forme name as desired.

4) Click "Save CFG & CSV" to save the selected game and filepaths.


II. Please note that:

1) Keep an eye on the console (text window), if anything goes wrong you will (hopefully) see errors I can use to identify and fix the problem there, and you will also get some feedback on what it's doing.

2) The first time you create your csv file, you might need to save it and reload in order for the additions to populate properly in the window.

3) The config file is created by this tool to save your settings, so you do not have to reselect all the other options and filepaths every time you use this tool for a given thing.

4) THe CSV file is a report generated by this tool that records which files each Pokemon/Forme has its data in, as well as listing every single Pokemon and Forme. This is required for this tool to work after the first insertion (as it references this table to know where everything is), and also allows you, the user, to easily see what you have added and what is where.



II. Use Instructions:

0) Close Pk3ds if you have it open, it will fight with this program for, in particular, the Personal file, and overwrite any changes made.

1) Select the the Species (e.g. Bulbasaur) you are adding Forme(s) to in the first dropdown box. You can type part or all of a name in any of them to narrow the search. If you enter a complete name, it will automatically capitalize itself (and set that option without any further action needed).

2) Enter the number of formes you want to insert.

3a) By default, this program will copy the Personal, Levelup, and Evolution files from the base forme of the selected species to set things up. If you want to copy any of those from a different specific instance, deselect the "Same as species" options above the desired custom selector, and select the desired source. Inserted formes will be named <Base Species> <#th forme>. Once the CSV file is updated with the inserted formes, you can change that default forme name with a custom one for tracking purposes (this will be reflected in the loaded lists in the tool when the updated CSV file is then reloaded). You can tab directly between all of the entries on the bottom row

3b) If you want to add unique data for an existing cosmetic forme (e.g. Female Venusaur or Pyroar, the different colors of Florges, etc.), uncheck "Initialize Model Files". If the program detects that there are not as many free cosmetic formes for the selected Pokemon as you told it Formes to add, it will report as such in the console and abort.

4) Hit "Insert Forme(s)"

5) Load Pk3ds and confirm that the formes are properly inserted. If so, you may now edit the new formes as desired. Please note that the index numbers of all formes will be sorted by nat dex number (e.g. the first alt-forme will be Venusaur after the last species, instead of Deoxys). This was implemented because the game requires all alternate formes of a given species to have consecutie index numbers, so adding formes to any Pokemon with existing formes requires shuffling around the indices, at which point it was actually simplest to just sort them like this.

6) The new model files (8 (gen VI) or 9 (gen VII) files) will be inserted after every other existing files for that species. The model files are tracked in the generated CSV file. You will have to extract the GARC to edit them.


A tutorial can be found at https://youtu.be/gu5JrxL3v4g (this is for the previous version, it is still _mostly_ accurate, aside from extracting the GARCs.
